In this video I'd like to go over the basics of iterators in the standard template library iterators
allow us to think of a container as a sequence of elements.
It doesn't matter what the container is.
For example we might have a vector or a set or a map.
There are very different containers but iterators allow us to process sequence of elements from these
containers without worrying or even needing to know about how the container is implemented behind the
scenes.
That gives us so much power.
Iterators are implemented as template classes so we create iterator objects and use them to iterate
through our containers.
The syntax we use with iterators will remind you of pointers.
We can use the dereference operator the increment and decrement operators and so forth.
This was done intentionally.
C++ programmers are comfortable with the pointer syntax and it's very easy to learn how to use iterators
without having to learn some other arbitrary syntax.
Most of the ACL containers can be traversed with iterators.
There are a few exceptions such as a stack in a queue and we'll see them later.
So what do iterators looked like and how do we use them an iterator must be declared based on the type
of container type that it will iterate over.
So if I have a vector of integers then my iterator must know that when I create it.
The syntax is very straightforward.
We provide the container type the scope resolution operator the iterator type and then the name of our
iterator object.
That sounds complicated I know but it's not.
Let's see some examples and you'll see the following declarations I'm declaring for iterator objects.
The first one is an iterator that will iterate over a vector of integers.
It can only be used on vectors of integers.
The second two can iterate over a list of strings.
A list is a container in the SPL which we'll see later in this section.
The third 83 can iterate over a map of string string pairs.
Maps are like dictionaries will also see them in this section.
Finally I-84 is an iterator that can iterate over sets of characters as you can see we must be very
specific when declaring iterators.
Now let's look at an example using a vector.
So we can see how to initialize iterators in this example.
We've created a vector of integers named Veck and initialized it to 1 2 and 3.
Remember a vector is a container in the SPL that stores elements in contiguous memory and can resize
itself to accommodate elements dynamically how this is implemented in the SPL doesn't really matter
to us what we do need to know is that a container has a beginning and an end.
The FCL defines the beginning as the first element in the container.
In this case the one and the child defines the end as one after the last element in the container this
is very important and it's consistent throughout TSTO the end is not the last element.
It's one after the last element.
Almost all of the steel containers have begin and methods when we call these methods they return an
iterator object that's pointing to either the first element in the container or one past the last element
in the container.
In this case vector begin will return an iterator that's pointing to the element 1 and vector and will
return an iterator pointing 1 past the element 3 in this case.
When we write code we use vector.
End as the sentinel so that we know when we're at the end of the list.
Now suppose we have a set a set may or may not be implemented in contiguous memory.
It doesn't matter.
And that's the point.
We don't need to know if we want to iterate over a set of characters names suits in this case.
We know that suits that began we'll return an iterator to the first element in the set and suits that
and we'll return an iterator one past the last element in the set.
We can use this information to initialize our iterators.
For example we can declare an iterator named I-T that will iterate over a vector of integers and then
initialize I-T to point to the first element in that vector.
We do that by calling vector.
Again in this case I will point to the element 1 in the vector.
If the vector had been empty then it would point to vector and now the syntax can get long when we do
this so we can use auto to let the compiler deduce the type of the iterator.
This is really handy and it's used very often so the compiler deduces the type of I-T is an iterator
to a vector of integers based on the result returned by vector.
Again this is much more readable and much more rideable and easier to debug.
There are a bunch of operations that we can use on iterators.
Most will feel very similar to using pointers in this table we have a few of the most commonly used
operations for iterators.
The first column is the operation.
The second column explains what it does.
And the third column shows what type of iterators supports the operation.
In this table will assume that I-T is an iterator and is an integer.
Notice the first two iterator operations pre-increment and post-increment.
When we increment an iterator we're asking it to point to the next element in the container.
How is that determined.
It's up to the container we're using.
The third operation is assigning one iterator to another.
Of course the types of the iterators must be the same.
These three operations are supported by all iterators.
The Forth OPERATOR Is the dereference operator.
Just like when we dereference a pointer when we dereference an iterator we get the element in the container
that it's pointing to and we can also use the error operator when we're pointing to objects and we want
to access their attributes and methods.
Both input and output iterators support this and we're able to read and write elements to containers
for the rest of the operators.
You can pause the video and look at them on your own.
Notice that we have ways to compare iterators and we can also decrement operators.
Some container support bidirectional iterators which means that we can move forward and backwards through
the container.
Others support random access iterators like arrays and vectors.
So how can we use these operators to work with iterators.
Here's a really simple but common example.
First we declare VEC as a vector of integers and will initialize it to 1 2 and 3.
What we want to do is use an iterator to iterate over the vector and display the contents of the vector.
So we declare our iterator I-T as an iterator over a vector of integers and we initialize it to the
first element of Veck by calling vector begin.
Now we simply iterate through the vector while I-T is not equal to Vicot end and at each iteration we
display the element the iterators pointing to by dereferencing the iterator.
Then we moved to the next element by incrementing the iterator.
That's it.
Simple as pie.
I know what you're thinking.
Why not just use a range base for loop or counter control for a loop.
We absolutely could and we often do.
We'll see in a bit that arr. base for loop is converted to an iterator based loop behind the scenes
by the compiler.
But the real answer is that in the case of a vector we could do it a lot of different ways but other
containers don't allow us to randomly access elements like a vector does.
So for those containers iterators are necessary.
We can achieve the same result with a for loop instead of a while loop.
Here we declare I-T using auto.
This makes the code much more readable.
We start at Vector that begin with loop while t is not equal to vector on end and we display the element
by dereferencing the iterator that we increment the iterator and do it all over again.
This is exactly how range base for loops work.
In fact sometimes we might mess up the code in a range based for loop that iterates over a container
and the compiler gives us an error message saying that something is wrong with the iterator.
This error is really confusing to beginning students but no more.
If you ever get an error like that you'll know exactly what's going on.
Now let's iterate over a set of characters using an iterator.
Here we define suits to be a set of characters and we initialize it to the character C-h SD.
We can also declare our iterator I-T is auto and let the compiler deduce its type based on the result
of suit stop begin.
Then we loop while I-T is not equal to suits that end and display the character increment the iterator
and loop again.
The pattern should look familiar.
Finally let's wrap up these slides by looking at a reverse iterator or reverse.
Iterator is exactly what you would expect.
It works in reverse.
So the last element is the first and the first is the last and when we increment the iterator we move
backwards to the container in reverse when we decrement the iterator we move forward.
Here's the same example with Veck as a vector of the three integers 1 2 and 3.
We then declare I t as a reverse iterator and initialize I-T to vector begin.
Since it's a reverse iterator I will be pointing to the last element in the list not the first.
Now we can write code as we did before and this will display the vector elements in reverse 3 to one
in this case.
In addition to the reverse iterator there's a few variants that are constant raters that are read only
iterators.
Let's take a look at those really quickly.
So in this slide I will wrap up the iterators by learning about the constant raters.
These are methods in the appropriate container class that returns specific types of iterators.
You can see that we used begin and end for regular iterators.
We can also use C begin and see end for constant raters are began in our end for reverse iterators as
we saw in the previous slide and see our begin and our end for Konst reverse iterators.
OK so that's a basic introduction to the ACL iterators.
There is much much more to learn but this foundation will let you use iterators with containers and
algorithms and solve a bunch of problems.
So let's head over to the idea and I'll go over some of the simple iterators in life code.